Create licenses-hardware.md (#3148)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/website/reproducible-research/licensing/licensiing-hardware.md

> # Open Hardware Licenses- section to be used in the licensing section.

Reviewer: I know you'll edit this, but just adding as a suggested edit just in case
```suggestion
# Open Hardware Licenses
```

## Introduction
Licensing is an important aspect of sharing/publishing open source projects as it provides clarity for anyone looking to reuse your open source project.
Without licenses in place, anyone who wants to reuse it, is left with legal ambiguity as to the status of using your intellectual property.

> While we are looking to focus on open source hardware licenses, this should be considered within the broader open source movement. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this chapter focuses on open source hardware licenses, this should be considered within the broader open source movement. 
```

The open source licensing of hardware came out of open source software licenses and, in fact, several open source software licenses are widely accepted within the open hardware community. 

> ```{warning}

Reviewer: This warning feels like something that might be better suited to the general licensing page, as it applies more broadly to all the existing chapters surrounding licenses that we currently have: https://the-turing-way.netlify.app/reproducible-research/licensing.html.

Maybe we could bring this over there, and add a shorter disclosure here?

Author: yes, some hypothesis comment asks for it too.

It is important to consider that copyright, licenses, and patents are all legal concepts.

> As such, they are subject to what the law prescribe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As such, they are subject to what the law prescribes.
```

> As such, they are subject to what the law prescribe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As such, they are subject to what the law prescribes, which may change over time.
```

> And laws can change.

Reviewer: Suggested edit above
```suggestion
```

This change is not only that one of the laws is changing over time, but it changes over space: depending on jurisdiction and enforcement.
Simply put, different countries have different laws, and follow different procedures with regard to enforcing them.
The content provided here is broadly based on American and European law and legal traditions.
It might not be applicable - might even be contra indicated - or relevant in your particular context.
While things like the Berne Convention have sought to harmonize copyright enforcement, the real world is a messy place.

Please also note that the information provided here was not written by a lawyer.
So do not take the descriptions provided or viewpoints shared as legal advice, they are not that.
This document is not intended to be used in that manner.
Consult a legal expert to provide actual legal advice for your case.  
```

## Content
To understand what licenses do and how to apply them, it is first important to be familiar with a number of terms.

> Often terms like copyright, licenses, patents, and trademarks are used interchangeably (sometimes incorrectly).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Terms like copyright, licenses, patents, and trademarks are often used interchangeably (and sometimes incorrectly).
```

This may lead to confusion as to what exactly is being discussed and what the implications are.
Familiarise yourself with the following terms and follow the links to understand more about them.

```{admonition} Info
**[Copyright](https://europa.eu/youreurope/business/running-business/intellectual-property/copyright/index_en.htm#shortcut-1/):** “When you create an original literary, scientific and artistic work, such as poems, articles, films, songs or sculptures, you are protected by copyright.
Nobody apart from you has the right to make the work public or reproduce it.
” And, “If you create literary, scientific and artistic work, you automatically have copyright protection, which starts from the moment you create your work, so you don't need to go through any formal application process.”

> **[License](https://www.oshwa.org/faq/#what-is-a-license/):** “ Licensing is a way to give people rights that they wouldn’t otherwise have to use your intellectual property (IP) and, in return, to place restrictions on how they exercise those rights.”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[License](https://www.oshwa.org/faq/#what-is-a-license/):** “Licensing is a way to give people rights that they wouldn’t otherwise have to use your intellectual property (IP) and, in return, to place restrictions on how they exercise those rights.”
```

While the former is protected by copyright, the latter would usually need a patent (if it is indeed patentable) to be protected.
It is important to note that copyrights and patents are mutually exclusive: something is either protected by copyright or it is protected by a patent, but not both simultaneously. 

### What licenses to use

While, as discussed above, there are difficulties with regard to applying licenses to open source hardware projects, there are community practices that are good to know and follow.
A good place to start is to see which licenses are generally accepted by OSHWA:

- [GNU General Public License (GPL)](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html/)
-	[Creative Commons licenses](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/)
-	[CERN Open Hardware Licenses](https://ohwr.org/project/cernohl/wikis/home)
-	[TAPR Open Hardware License](https://tapr.org/the-tapr-open-hardware-license/)
-	[Solderpad Hardware License](http://solderpad.org/licenses/)

The licenses listed above are used in open source hardware. 
They can be broadly classified as permissive licenses and reciprocal or copyleft licenses.
You may see here the connection with software licenses.

> As mentionned before, this is not an accident.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned before, this is not an accident.
```

The CC-BY-SA license falls under open source copyleft licenses. 
Most copyleft licenses fall under open source licenses but not all open source licenses are copyleft.

 The CC licenses offer a spectrum of licensing with the CC0 and CC-BY licenses being permissive open source licenses.
 Creative Commons recommends that CC licenses should not be used for licensing software.
 The MIT license and FreeBSD license are also permissive licenses. 

#### Hardware Native licenses

Due to the unique challenges faced when licensing open source hardware, licenses specifically tailored to be used with open source hardware have been created.
The CERN Open Hardware License is a prominent member in this category with the [CERN OHL v2.0](https://ohwr.org/project/cernohl/wikis/Documents/CERN-OHL-version-2/) license coming in three flavours:

- the copyleft or strongly reciprocal CERN-OHL-S  variant
- the weakly reciprocal CERN-OHL-W variant
- the permissive CERN-OHL-P variant.
  
The aforementioned TARP Open hardware license is also a copyleft license, while the Solderpad Hardware License is a permissive license. 

> The advantage of using the licenses developed specifically for hardware is that they try to address the peculiarities of licensing open source hardware.

Author: This is still relevant
